From: noring@netcom.com (Jon Noring)
Subject: Great Post! (was Re: Candida (yeast) Bloom...) (VERY LONG)
Summary: Warning, lots of words in typical Phlegmatic fashion
Organization: Netcom Online Communications Services (408-241-9760 login: guest)
Lines: 447


The trial will test two doses each of three experimental vaccines made from 
recombinant HIV proteins.  These so-called subunit vaccines, each genetically 
engineered to contain only a piece of the virus, have so far proved well-
tolerated in ongoing trials in HIV-infected adults. 

One vaccine made by MicroGeneSys Inc. of Meriden, Conn., contains gp160--a 
protein  that gives rise to HIV's surface proteins--plus alum adjuvant.  
Adjuvants boost specific immune responses to a vaccine.  Presently, alum is 
the only adjuvant used in human vaccines licensed by the Food and Drug 
Administration. 

Both of the other vaccines--one made by Genentech Inc. of South San Francisco 
and the other by Biocine, a joint venture of Chiron and CIBA-Geigy, in 
Emeryville, Calif.--contain the major HIV surface protein, gp120, plus 
adjuvant.  The Genentech vaccine contains alum, while the Biocine vaccine 
contains MF59, an experimental adjuvant that has proved safe and effective in 
other Phase I vaccine trials in adults. 

A low dose of each product will be tested first against a placebo in 15 
children.  Twelve children will be assigned at random to be immunized with the 
experimental vaccine, and three children will be given adjuvant alone, 
considered the placebo.  Neither the health care workers nor the children will 
be told what they receive. 

If the low dose is well-tolerated, controlled testing of a higher dose of the 
experimental vaccine and adjuvant placebo in another group of 15 children will 
begin. 

Each child will receive six immunizations--one every four weeks for six 
months--and be followed-up for 24 weeks after the last immunization.  

For more information about the trial sites or eligibility for enrollment, call 
the AIDS Clinical Trials Information Service, 1-800-TRIALS-A, from 9 a.m. to 7 
p.m., EST weekdays.  The service has Spanish-speaking information specialists 
available.  Information on NIAID's pediatric HIV/AIDS research is available 
from the Office of Communications at (301) 496- 5717.  

NIH, CDC and FDA are agencies of the U.S. Public Health Service in HHS. For 
press inquiries only, please call Laurie K. Doepel at (301) 402-1663.




HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 49
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

           NEW EVIDENCE THAT THE HIV CAN CAUSE DISEASE INDEPENDENTLY
              News from the National Institute of Dental Research

There is new evidence that the human immunodeficiency virus can cause disease 
independently of its ability to suppress the immune system, say scientists at 
the National Institues of Health. 

They report that HIV itself, not an opportunistic infection, caused scaling 
skin conditions to develop in mice carrying the genes for HIV.  Although the 
HIV genes were active in the mice, they did not compromise the animals' 
immunity, the researchers found.  This led them to conclude that the HIV 
itself caused the skin disease. 

Our findings support a growing body of evidence that HIV can cause disease 
without affecting the immune system, said lead author Dr. Jeffrey Kopp of the 
National Institute of Dental Research (NIDR).  Dr. Kopp and his colleagues 
described their study in the March issue of AIDS Research and Human 
Retroviruses. 

Developing animal models of HIV infection has been difficult, since most 
animals, including mice, cannot be infected by the virus.  To bypass this 
problem, scientists have developed HIV-transgenic mice, which carry genes for 
HIV as well as their own genetic material. 

NIDR scientists created the transgenic mice by injecting HIV genes into mouse 
eggs and then implanting the eggs into female mice.  The resulting litters 
contained both normal and transgenic animals. 

Institute scientists had created mice that carried a complete copy of HIV 
genetic material in l988.  Those mice, however, became sick and died too soon 
after birth to study in depth.  In the present study, the scientists used an 
incomplete copy of HIV, which allowed the animals to live longer. 

Some of the transgenic animals developed scaling, wart-like tumors on their 
necks and backs.  Other transgenic mice developed thickened, crusting skin 
lesions that covered most of their bodies, resembling psoriasis in humans.  No 
skin lesions developed in their normal, non-transgenic littermates. 

Studies of tissue taken from the wart-like skin tumors showed that they were a 
type of noncancerous tumor called papilloma. Although the papillomavirus can 
cause these skin lesions, laboratory tests showed no sign of that virus in the 
animals. 

Tissue samples taken from the sick mice throughout the study revealed the 
presence of a protein-producing molecule made by the HIV genetic material.  

HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 50
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

Evidence of HIV protein production proved that the viral genes were "turned 
on," or active, said Dr. Kopp. 

The scientists found no evidence, however, of compromised immunity in the 
mice:  no increase in their white blood cell count and no signs of common 
infections.  The fact that HIV genes were active but the animals' immune 
systems were not suppressed confirms that the virus itself was causing the 
skin lesions, Dr. Kopp said. 

Further proof of HIV gene involvement came from a test in which the scientists 
exposed the transgenic animals to ultraviolet light.  The light increased HIV 
genetic activity causing papillomas to develop on formerly healthy skin.  
Papilloma formation in response to increased HIV genetic activity proved the 
genes were responsible for the skin condition, the scientists said.  No 
lesions appeared on normal mice exposed to the UV light. 

The transgenic mice used in this study were developed at NIDR by Dr. Peter 
Dickie, who is now with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases. 

Collaborating on the study with Dr. Kopp were Mr. Charles Wohlenberg, Drs. 
Nickolas Dorfman, Joseph Bryant, Abner Notkins, and Paul Klotman, all of NIDR; 
Dr. Stephen Katz of the National Cancer Institute; and Dr. James Rooney, 
formerly with NIDR and now with Burroughs Wellcome.





















HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 51
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

               Clinical Consultation Telephone Service for AIDS
                                H H S   N E W S
                 ********************************************
                 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

                                 March 4, 1993


     HHS Secretary Donna E. Shalala today announced the first nationwide 
clinical consultation telephone service for doctors and other health care 
professionals who have questions about providing care to people with HIV 
infection or AIDS. 
     The toll-free National HIV Telephone Consulting Service is staffed by a 
physician, a nurse practitioner and a pharmacist. It provides information on 
drugs, clinical trials and the latest treatment methods.  The service is 
funded by the Health Resources and Services Administration and operates out of 
San Francisco General Hospital. 
     Secretary Shalala said, "One goal of this project is to share expertise 
so patients get the best care.  A second goal is to get more primary health 
care providers involved in care for people with HIV or AIDS, which reduces 
treatment cost by allowing patients to remain with their medical providers and 
community social support networks.  Currently, many providers refer patients 
with HIV or AIDS to specialists or other providers who have more experience." 
     Secretary Shalala said, "This clinical expertise should be especially 
helpful for physicians and providers who treat people with HIV or AIDS in 
communities and clinical sites where HIV expertise is not readily available." 
     The telephone number for health care professionals is 1-800-933-3413, and 
it is accessible from 10:30 a.m. to 8 p.m. EST (7:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. PST) 
Monday through Friday.  During these times, consultants will try to answer 
questions immediately, or within an hour.  At other times, physicians and 
health care providers can leave an electronic message, and questions will be 
answered as quickly as possible. 
     Health care professionals may call the service to ask any question 
related to providing HIV care, including the latest HIV/AIDS drug treatment 
information, clinical trials information, subspecialty case referral, 
literature searches and other information.  The service is designed for health 
care professionals rather than patients, families or others who have alternate 
sources of information or materials. 
     When a health care professional calls the new service, the call is taken 
by either a clinical pharmacist, primary care physician or family nurse 
practitioner.  All staff members have extensive experience in outpatient and 
inpatient primary care for people with HIV-related diseases.  The consultant 
asks for patient-specific information, including CD4 cell count, current 
medications, sex, age and the patient's HIV history. 
     This national service has grown out of a 16-month local effort that 

HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 52
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

responded to nearly 1,000 calls from health care providers in northern 
California.  The initial project was funded by HRSA's Bureau of Health 
Professions, through its Community Provider AIDS Training (CPAT) project, and 
by the American Academy of Family Physicians. 
     "When providers expand their knowledge, they also improve the quality of 
care they are able to provide to their patients," said HRSA Administrator 
Robert G. Harmon. M.D., M.P.H.  "This project will be a great resource for 
health care professionals and the HIV/AIDS patients they serve." 
     "This service has opened a new means of communication between health care 
professionals and experts on HIV care management," said HRSA's associate 
administrator for AIDS and director of the Bureau of Health Resources 
Development, G. Stephen Bowen, M.D., M.P.H.  "Providers who treat people with 
HIV or AIDS have access to the latest information on new drugs, treatment 
methods and therapies for people with HIV or AIDS." 
     HRSA is one of eight U.S. Public Health Service agencies within HHS.  


                      AIDS Hotline Numbers for Consumers

                  CDC National AIDS Hotline -- 1-800-342-AIDS
                  for information in Spanish - 1-800-344-SIDA
          AIDS Clinical Trials (English & Spanish) -- 1-800-TRIALS-A























HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 53

------------- cut here -----------------
-- This is the last part ---------------

---
      Internet: david@stat.com                  FAX: +1 (602) 451-1165
      Bitnet: ATW1H@ASUACAD                     FidoNet= 1:114/15
                Amateur Packet ax25: wb7tpy@wb7tpy.az.usa.na

