HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 20
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

                   Publication of CDC Surveillance Summaries
                   =========================================
                   SOURCE: MMWR 42(14)   DATE: Apr 16, 1993

     Since 1983, CDC has published the CDC Surveillance Summaries under 
separate cover as part of the MMWR series. Each report published in the CDC 
Surveillance Summaries focuses on public health surveillance; surveillance 
findings are reported for a broad range of risk factors and health conditions. 
     Summaries for each of the reports published in the most recent (March 19, 
1993) issue of the CDC Surveillance Summaries (1) are provided below. All 
subscribers to MMWR receive the CDC Surveillance Summaries, as well as the 
MMWR Recommendations and Reports, as part of their subscriptions.

 SURVEILLANCE FOR AND COMPARISON OF BIRTH DEFECT PREVALENCES
                               IN TWO GEOGRAPHIC 
                        AREAS -- UNITED STATES, 1983-88 

     Problem/Condition: CDC and some states have developed surveillance 
systems to monitor the birth prevalence of major defects. 
     Reporting Period Covered: This report covers birth defects surveillance 
in metropolitan Atlanta, Georgia, and selected jurisdictions in California for 
the years 1983-1988. 
     Description of System: The California Birth Defects Monitoring Program 
and the Metropolitan Atlanta Congenital Defects Program are two population-
based surveillance systems that employ similar data collection methods. The 
prevalence estimates for 44 diagnostic categories were based on data for 1983-
1988 for 639,837 births in California and 152,970 births in metropolitan 
Atlanta. The prevalences in the two areas were compared, adjusting for race, 
sex, and maternal age by using Poisson regression. 
     Results: Regional differences in the prevalence of aortic stenosis, fetal 
alcohol syndrome, hip dislocation/dysplasia, microcephalus, obstruction of the 
kidney/ureter, and scoliosis/lordosis may be attributable to general 
diagnostic variability. However, differences in the prevalences of arm/hand 
limb reduction, encephalocele, spina bifida, or trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) are 
probably not attributable to differences in ascertainment, because these 
defects are relatively easy to diagnose. 
     Interpretation: Regional differences in prenatal diagnosis and pregnancy 
termination may affect prevalences of trisomy 21 and spina bifida. However, 
the reason for differences in arm/hand reduction is unknown, but may be 
related to variability in environmental exposure, heterogeneity in the gene 
pool, or random variation. 
     Actions Taken: Because of the similarities of these data bases, several 
collaborative studies are being implemented. In particular, the differences in 
the birth prevalence of spina bifida and Down syndrome will focus attention on 
the impact of prenatal diagnosis. Authors: Jane Schulman, Ph.D., Nancy 

HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 21
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

Jensvold, M.P.H, Gary M. Shaw, Dr.P.H., California Birth Defects Monitoring 
Program, March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation. Larry D. Edmonds, M.S.P.H., 
Anne B. McClearn, Division of Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, 
National Center for Environmental Health, CDC. 

                      INFLUENZA -- UNITED STATES, 1988-89

     Problem/Condition: CDC monitors the emergence and spread of new influenza 
virus variants and the impact of influenza on morbidity and mortality annually 
from October through May. 
     Reporting Period Covered: This report covers U.S. influenza surveillance 
conducted from October 1988 through May 1989. 
     Description of System: Weekly reports from the vital statistics offices 
of 121 cities provided an index of influenza's impact on mortality; 58 WHO 
collaborating laboratories reported weekly identification of influenza 
viruses; weekly morbidity reports were received both from the state and 
territorial epidemiologists and from 153 sentinel family practice physicians. 
Nonsystematic reports of outbreaks and unusual illnesses were received 
throughout the year. 
     Results: During the 1988-89 influenza season, influenza A(H1N1) and B 
viruses were identified in the United States with essentially equal frequency 
overall, although both regional and temporal patterns of predominance shifted 
over the course of the season. Throughout the season increases in the indices 
of influenza morbidity in regions where influenza A(H1N1) predominated were 
similar to increases in regions where influenza B predominated. Only 7% of 
identified viruses were influenza A(H3N2), but isolations of this subtype 
increased as the season waned, and it subsequently predominated during the 
1989-90 season. During the 1988-89 season outbreaks in nursing homes were 
reported in association with influenza B and A(H3N2) but not influenza 
A(H1N1). 
     Interpretation: The alternating temporal and geographic predominance of 
influenza strains A(H1N1) and B during the 1988-89 season emphasizes the 
importance of continual attention to regional viral strain surveillance, since 
amantadine is effective only for treatment and prophylaxis of influenza A. 
     Actions Taken: Weekly interim analyses of surveillance data produced 
throughout the season allow physicians and public health officials to make 
informed choices regarding appropriate use of amantadine. CDC's annual 
surveillance allows the observed viral variants to be assessed as candidates 
for inclusion as components in vaccines used in subsequent influenza seasons. 
Authors: Louisa E. Chapman, M.D., M.S.P.H., Epidemiology Activity, Office of 
the Director, Division of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases, National Center for 
Infectious Diseases; Margaret A. Tipple, M.D., Division of Quarantine, 
National Center for Prevention Services, CDC. Suzanne Gaventa Folger, M.P.H., 
Health Investigations Branch, Division of Health Studies, Agency for Toxic 
Substances and Disease Registry. Maurice Harmon, Ph.D., Connaught 

HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 22
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

Laboratories, Pasteur-Mirieux Company, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania. Alan P. 
Kendal, Ph.D., European Regional Office, World Health Organization, 
Copenhagen, Denmark. Nancy J. Cox, Ph.D., Influenza Branch, Division of Viral 
and Rickettsial Diseases, National Center for Infectious Diseases; Lawrence B. 
Schonberger, M.D., M.P.H., Epidemiology Activity, Office of the Director, 
Division of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases, National Center for Infectious 
Diseases, CDC. 

Reference

1. CDC. CDC surveillance summaries (March 19). MMWR 1993;42(no. SS-1).


































HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 23
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993



::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
                            Clinical Research News
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

                          Clinical Research News for
                              Arizona Physicians

                 Vol. 4, No. 4, April 1993     Tucson, Arizona

Published monthly by the Office of Public Affairs at The University of Arizona
                            Health Sciences Center.   
                   Copyright 1993, The University of Arizona

                 High Tech Assisted Reproductive Technologies

Following the birth of the first in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer (IVF-
ET) baby in 1978, a host of assisted reproductive technologies have been 
developed that include IVF-ET, gamete intrafallopian tube transfer (GIFT), 
embryo cryopreservation (freezing) and gamete micromanipulation. Together, 
these technologies are referred to as the high-tech assisted reproductive 
technology (ART) procedures. 

Ovulation induction, sperm insemination and surgery for tubal disease and/or 
pathology still are the mainstays of the therapies available for infertility 
management. However, when these fail, it almost always is appropriate to 
proceed with one of the ART procedures. 

Therefore, in addition to a comprehensive basic and general infertility 
service at The University of Arizona Center for Reproductive Endocrinology and 
Infertility, there is a program of Assisted Reproduction that specializes in 
ART procedures. This program serves as a tertiary provider for those patients 
in the state of Arizona whose infertility problems cannot be resolved by the 
traditional therapies. 

The following article (on back) describes the ART procedures available in our 
Center, clarifies appropriate applications for each, and considers the 
realistic expectations for their success. Procedures included are: 

o in vitro 
o fertilization - embryo transfer (IVF-ET),  gamete intrafallopian tube 
  transfer 
o (GIFT),  cryopreservation of human embryos and  gamete micromanipulation. 
This article also considers ongoing research in our program that is directed 
towards improved success of these technologies. 


HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 24
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

                           Future Areas of Research

In addition to ongoing research that is directed exclusively toward the 
management of infertile couples, we are developing the technology to assist 
couples who are at risk for producing embryos with a serious hereditary 
disease. 

This technology involves biopsying the preimplantation human embryo and then 
subjecting the biopsied cells to genetic analysis using either DNA 
amplification or fluorescent in situ hybridization. 

There are recent reports of the successful application of DNA amplification by 
other centers, for example, for diagnosis of the genes for cystic fibrosis and 
hemophilia. We hope to apply and further focus fluorescent in situ 
hybridization technology for probing the X chromosome, the identification of 
which will provide a scientific basis for counselling patients who exhibit 
sex-linked disorders. 

The considerable clinical application of such technology lies in the fact that 
it circumvents the need for prenatal diagnosis, in addition to the possibility 
of a subsequent termination of affected fetuses, in order to avoid the birth 
of affected children. 


Catherine Racowsky, Ph.D.
Associate Professor and Director of Research
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
College of Medicine 
University of Arizona
Tucson, Arizona

               Applications, Success Rates and Advances for the
                           Management of Infertility

The following are the ART procedures available at The University of Arizona 
Center for Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility. 

     In Vitro Fertilization - Embryo Transfer is the core ART procedure of our 
Assisted Reproduction Program.  This procedure involves retrieval of 
unfertilized eggs from the ovary, their insemination in vitro in a dish, and 
the culture of resultant embryos for 1 or 2 days, before they are transferred 
to the patient's uterus. All cultures are maintained in an incubator under 
strictly controlled atmospheric and temperature conditions. Before being 
processed for use in insemination, semen samples are evaluated in our 
andrology laboratory using both subjective light microscopy and computer-

HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 25
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

assisted semen analyses. To ensure an adequate number of eggs with which to 
perform IVF-ET, or indeed, GIFT, follicular development is typically 
stimulated, with gonadotropins (perganol, metrodin), gonadotropin releasing 
hormone (GnRH, Factrel, lutrepulse) and/or GnRH analogues (lupron, Depo 
lupron, synarel). Occasionally, however, IVF-ET is accomplished with eggs 
obtained in non-stimulated cycles. While some programs utilize laparoscopic 
egg retrieval in the operating room with the patient under general anesthesia, 
we undertake the less costly approach of ultrasound-guided retrieval in our 
Infertility Unit, with the patient sedated.  
     Couples who resort to IVF-ET exhibit such pathologies as tubal 
deficiencies, ovulatory dysfunction, endometriosis, and/or mild forms of male 
factor infertility.  According to the United States IVF Registry, the overall 
success rate for IVF-ET nationwide has stabilized at about 14 percent per 
cycle. Results from our program, involving 86 patients who have undergone 173 
IVF-ET cycles, reflect a comparable success rate. 
     Nevertheless, the overall incidence of success with this procedure is 
disconcertingly low and emphasizes the need to address those physiological 
factors that limit achievement of a higher percentage of pregnancies.  Well 
recognized predictors of outcome include patient age, response to exogenous 
ovarian stimulation, quality of sperm and number of repeated IVF-ET cycle 
attempts. However, among these, age is the single most significant determinant 
of conception. Therefore, it is critical that such patients are referred to an 
Assisted Reproduction Program at the earliest opportunity following failure of 
traditional therapies. 
     The underlying basis for the negative effect of age on fertility has not 
been clearly delineated beyond recognition that: 1) the number of eggs 
available for retrieval declines markedly with age; 2) fertilization rates 
significantly decrease in eggs retrieved from patients who are over 40 years; 
and 3) provided the appropriate hormonal background is present, age is 
unrelated to uterine competency to sustain pregnancy. Ongoing research in our 
Center, therefore, is investigating physiological changes in the egg that may 
be impacted by age. We have determined that more than 50 percent of eggs that 
fail to fertilize in vitro are chromosomally abnormal, and that a significant 
proportion of these abnormalities are accountable to patient age. Currently, 
the only recourse for such patients is to use eggs obtained from a donor. Our 
program has initiated recruitment of volunteer egg donors to satisfy the needs 
of a list of recipients interested in this form of therapy. 

     GIFT - This high-tech ART procedure is performed in the operating room, 
usually with the use of a laparoscope and, in contrast to IVF-ET, involves 
introducing sperm and freshly retrieved eggs into the lumen of the Fallopian 
tube (an average of 3 eggs/tube). Under these circumstances, fertilization 
occurs in vivo and, if excess eggs are retrieved, the remainder undergo IVF, 
with subsequent options for embryo transfer in that cycle, or freezing for 
transfer in a subsequent cycle. This ART procedure is applied to cases in 

HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 26
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

which there is at least one patent Fallopian tube but the couple has such 
pathologies as ovulatory dysfunction, endometriosis, male factor infertility 
and/or idiopathic infertility.    
     The data reported in the United States IVF Registry for 1985 through 1990 
indicate that the overall success rate with GIFT is higher than that obtained 
with the IVF-ET technique (range of clinical pregnancies for GIFT is 24 to 36 
percent and for IVF-ET 14 to 18 percent). In view of this fact, one might 
expect more patients to be treated with GIFT than IVF-ET. However, in our 
program we have taken into account three basic concerns which, while 
substantially reducing the number of GIFT cycles performed, benefit the 
patient. These concerns are: 1) the increased costs associated with performing 
a procedure in the operating room; 2) the risks, albeit minimal, of undergoing 
general anesthesia; and 3) the considerable benefits to be accrued from 
obtaining direct information on the quality and fertilizability of the eggs, 
and the developmental competency of resultant embryos. 
     The increased success with GIFT undoubtedly reflects the artificial 
environment provided by the laboratory in the IVF-ET procedure. Between 
January 1, 1991, and December 31, 1992, we have performed a total of 12 GIFT 
cycles, with an overall success rate of 20 percent. 
     Embryo cryopreservation, or freezing, is applied in our program when 
embryos result from residual GIFT eggs or from non-transferred IVF embryos. 
This procedure not only provides patients with a subsequent opportunity for 
success at much reduced costs, but also circumvents the legal and ethical 
issues relating to disposal of supernumerary embryos. Therefore, as stipulated 
by the American Fertility Society ethical guidelines for ART programs, from 
both a practical and an ethical standpoint, all Assisted Reproduction programs 
should have the capability of cryopreserving human embrys. 
     Gamete Micromanipulation - This ART procedure, which is still very new, 
is applied to couples who are unaccepting of insemination with donor semen but 
who have severe male factor infertility (less than 10 million sperm/ml in 
combination with fewer than 20 perccent motile sperm, and/or less than 10 
percent sperm with normal morphology). We are currently developing the 
procedure of sub-zonal insertion (SZI), which entails injecting sperm under 
the coating around the egg, the barrier normally penetrated by the sperm 
through enzymatic digestion. 
     Available data from SZI programs world-wide indicate that only 5 to 10 
percent of SZI cycles result in a pregnancy. This statistic undoubtedly 
relates to limitations imposed by abnormalities inherent in the sperm. 
Therefore, we are currently focusing on the development of improved techniques 
for the recognition and selection of sperm chosen for manipulation. Such 
efforts are unquestionably worthwhile in view of the fact that this technology 
offers the only realistic opportunity for severe male factor patients to 
establish conception. 

Catherine Racowsky, Ph.D.

HICNet Medical Newsletter                                              Page 27
Volume  6, Number 10                                           April 20, 1993

Associate Professor and Director of Research
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
College of Medicine 
--------- end of part 2 ------------

---
      Internet: david@stat.com                  FAX: +1 (602) 451-1165
      Bitnet: ATW1H@ASUACAD                     FidoNet= 1:114/15
                Amateur Packet ax25: wb7tpy@wb7tpy.az.usa.na
